Semantic markup docs (#80240)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/dev_guide/developing_modules_documenting.rst

   Because it stands out better, use ``seealso`` for general references over the use of notes or adding links to the description.

Semantic markup within module documentation
-------------------------------------------

You can use semantic markup to highlight option names, option values, and environment variables. The publication process formats these terms in a uniform way. With semantic markup, we can change the look of the output without changing the underlying code. The correct formats for semantic markup are:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use semantic markup to highlight option names, option values, and environment variables. The markup processor formats these highlighted terms in a uniform way. With semantic markup, we can modify how the output looks without changing underlying code.

The correct formats for semantic markup are as follows:

```

Author: I agree to most changes, except the `we` → `you`. It should better be `the publication process` or `markup processor` (I think the latter sounds better).

Reviewer: How about now?

* ``O()`` for option names, whether mentioned alone or with values. For example: ``Required if O(state=present).`` and ``Use with O(force) to require secure access.``
* ``V()`` for option values when mentioned alone. For example: ``Possible values include V(monospace) and V(pretty).``
* ``RV()`` for return value names, whether mentioned alone or with values. For example: ``The module returns RV(changed=true) in case of changes.`` and ``Use the RV(stdout) return value for standard output.``
* ``E()`` for environment variables. For example: ``If not set, the environment variable E(ACME_PASSWORD) will be used.``

The parameters for these formatting functions can use quoting with backslashes: ``V(foo(bar="a\\b"\), baz)`` results in the formatted value ``foo(bar="a\b"), baz)``.

> Also note that there are strict rules for how ``O()`` and ``RV()`` can and must be used. This allows documentation renderers to create hyperlinks to the documentation for the options resp. return values. The allowed syntaxes are as following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rules for using ``O()`` and ``RV()`` are very strict. You must follow syntax rules so that documentation renderers can create hyperlinks for the options resp. return values.

The allowed syntaxes are as follows:
```

- To reference an option for the current plugin/module, use ``O(option)`` and ``O(option=name)``.
- To reference an option for *another* plugin/module, use ``O(plugin.fqcn.name#type:option)`` and ``O(plugin.fqcn.name#type:option=name)``. For modules, use ``type=module``. The FQCN and plugin type can be ignored by the documentation renderer, turned into a link to that plugin, or even directly to that plugin's option.
- To reference options that do not exist (for example, options that were removed in an earlier version), use ``O(ignore:option)`` and ``O(ignore:option=name)``. The ``ignore:`` part will not be shown to the user by documentation rendering.

> Option names can refer to suboptions by listing the path to the option separated by dots. For example, if you have an option ``foo`` with suboption ``bar``, then you must use ``O(foo.bar)`` to reference that suboption. You can add array indications like ``O(foo[].bar)`` or even ``O(foo[-1].bar)`` to indicate specific list elements. Trailing ``[]`` to option name parts will be removed including all text inbetween them to determine the real name of the option.

Reviewer: @felixfontein I find that last sentence hard to grok. Do you think you could show an example and the result?

Author: I've added an example in c71e4ba5b3c0b386696ceea7b1b7aefd9d0ca437, WDYT?

Reviewer: That helps me understand. I think we could maybe still trim down some of the wording. I'll add another suggestion now if that's OK.

> The same syntaxes can be used for ``RV()``, except that these will refer to return value names instead of option names. So for example ``RV(ansible.builtin.service_facts#module:ansible_facts.services)`` refers to the :ref:`ansible_facts.services fact <ansible_collections.ansible.builtin.service_facts_module__return-ansible_facts/services>` returned by the :ref:`ansible.builtin.service_facts module <ansible_collections.ansible.builtin.service_facts_module>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same syntaxes can be used for ``RV()``, except that these will refer to return value names instead of option names; for example ``RV(ansible.builtin.service_facts#module:ansible_facts.services)`` refers to the :ref:`ansible_facts.services fact <ansible_collections.ansible.builtin.service_facts_module__return-ansible_facts/services>` returned by the :ref:`ansible.builtin.service_facts module <ansible_collections.ansible.builtin.service_facts_module>`.
```

Format macros within module documentation
-----------------------------------------

> You can also use standard Python formatting to control the look of other terms in module documentation. Use these macros sparingly. The available macros include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it is possible to use standard Python formatting macros to control the look of other terms in module documentation, you should do so sparingly.

Possible macros include the following:
```

* ``E()`` for environment variables. For example: ``If not set, the environment variable E(ACME_PASSWORD) will be used.``

The parameters for these formatting functions can use quoting with backslashes: ``V(foo(bar="a\\b"\), baz)`` results in the formatted value ``foo(bar="a\b"), baz)``.

Rules for using ``O()`` and ``RV()`` are very strict. You must follow syntax rules so that documentation renderers can create hyperlinks for the options resp. return values.

The allowed syntaxes are as follows:
- To reference an option for the current plugin/module, use ``O(option)`` and ``O(option=name)``.
- To reference an option for *another* plugin/module, use ``O(plugin.fqcn.name#type:option)`` and ``O(plugin.fqcn.name#type:option=name)``. For modules, use ``type=module``. The FQCN and plugin type can be ignored by the documentation renderer, turned into a link to that plugin, or even directly to that plugin's option.
- To reference options that do not exist (for example, options that were removed in an earlier version), use ``O(ignore:option)`` and ``O(ignore:option=name)``. The ``ignore:`` part will not be shown to the user by documentation rendering.

> Option names can refer to suboptions by listing the path to the option separated by dots. For example, if you have an option ``foo`` with suboption ``bar``, then you must use ``O(foo.bar)`` to reference that suboption. You can add array indications like ``O(foo[].bar)`` or even ``O(foo[-1].bar)`` to indicate specific list elements. Trailing ``[]`` to option name parts will be removed including all text inbetween them to determine the real name of the option. For example, ``O(foo[foo | length - 1].bar[])`` does result in the same link as ``O(foo.bar)``, but shows the text ``foo[foo | length - 1].bar[]`` instead of ``foo.bar``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Option names can refer to suboptions by listing the path to the option separated by dots. For example, if you have an option ``foo`` with suboption ``bar``, then you must use ``O(foo.bar)`` to reference that suboption. You can add array indications like ``O(foo[].bar)`` or even ``O(foo[-1].bar)`` to indicate specific list elements. All text between ``[`` and ``]`` pairs will be ignored to determine the real name of the option. For example, ``O(foo[foo | length - 1].bar[])`` results in the same link as ``O(foo.bar)``, but the text ``foo[foo | length - 1].bar[]`` displays instead of ``foo.bar``.
```

Reviewer: Hopefully I didn't mangle the meaning of any of this.

Author: The changes for the last sentence are good, but the ones for the previous distort the meaning. How about something like:

> Everything between `[` and `]` pairs will be ignored to determine the real name of the option.

for that sentence?

Author: ```suggestion
Option names can refer to suboptions by listing the path to the option separated by dots. For example, if you have an option ``foo`` with suboption ``bar``, then you must use ``O(foo.bar)`` to reference that suboption. You can add array indications like ``O(foo[].bar)`` or even ``O(foo[-1].bar)`` to indicate specific list elements. Everything between ``[`` and ``]`` pairs will be ignored to determine the real name of the option. For example, ``O(foo[foo | length - 1].bar[])`` results in the same link as ``O(foo.bar)``, but the text ``foo[foo | length - 1].bar[]`` displays instead of ``foo.bar``.
```

   Because it stands out better, use ``seealso`` for general references over the use of notes or adding links to the description.

> Semantic markup within module documentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. _semantic_markup:

Semantic markup within module documentation
```

   Because it stands out better, use ``seealso`` for general references over the use of notes or adding links to the description.

.. _semantic_markup:

Semantic markup within module documentation
-------------------------------------------

You can use semantic markup to highlight option names, option values, and environment variables. The markup processor formats these highlighted terms in a uniform way. With semantic markup, we can modify how the output looks without changing underlying code.

The correct formats for semantic markup are as follows:

* ``O()`` for option names, whether mentioned alone or with values. For example: ``Required if O(state=present).`` and ``Use with O(force) to require secure access.``
* ``V()`` for option values when mentioned alone. For example: ``Possible values include V(monospace) and V(pretty).``
* ``RV()`` for return value names, whether mentioned alone or with values. For example: ``The module returns RV(changed=true) in case of changes.`` and ``Use the RV(stdout) return value for standard output.``

> * ``E()`` for environment variables. For example: ``If not set, the environment variable E(ACME_PASSWORD) will be used.``

Reviewer 3: @felixfontein Is there no support for `E(name=value)` syntax?

Author: @mattclay no; the reason is (or was) that it maps directly to Sphinx's `:envvar:` role (https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html#role-envvar), which doesn't support that either (or at least the documentation doesn't mention that). And simply nobody thought about it yet (or nobody bothered to mention that before you)...

The parameters for these formatting functions can use escaping with backslashes: ``V(foo(bar="a\\b"\), baz)`` results in the formatted value ``foo(bar="a\b"), baz)``.

> Rules for using ``O()`` and ``RV()`` are very strict. You must follow syntax rules so that documentation renderers can create hyperlinks for the options resp. return values.

Reviewer 3: What is `resp.` here?

Author: `O()` (for options) and `R()` for return values.

If someone has an idea how to formulate this better, please tell me, when it comes to using 'respectively' correctly my intuition is not very good :)

> Rules for using ``O()`` and ``RV()`` are very strict. You must follow syntax rules so that documentation renderers can create hyperlinks for the options resp. return values.

Reviewer 3: I think this an improvement. @oraNod may have other suggestions.

```suggestion
Rules for using ``O()`` and ``RV()`` are very strict. You must follow syntax rules so that documentation renderers can create hyperlinks for the options and return values, respectively.
```

Reviewer: LGTM.

The allowed syntaxes are as follows:

> - To reference an option for the current plugin/module, or the entrypoint of the current role (inside a role entrypoint documentation), use ``O(option)`` and ``O(option=name)``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To reference an option for the current plugin/module, or the entrypoint of the current role (inside role entrypoint documentation), use ``O(option)`` and ``O(option=name)``.
```

- To reference an option for *another* plugin/module ``plugin.fqcn.name`` of type ``type``, use ``O(plugin.fqcn.name#type:option)`` and ``O(plugin.fqcn.name#type:option=name)``. For modules, use ``type=module``. The FQCN and plugin type can be ignored by the documentation renderer, turned into a link to that plugin, or even directly to the option of that plugin.
- To reference an option for entrypoint ``entrypoint`` of *another* role ``role.fqcn.name``, use ``O(role.fqcn.name#role:entrypoint:option)`` and ``O(role.fqcn.name#role:entrypoint:option=name)``. The FQCN and entrypoint information can be ignored by the documentation renderer, turned into a link to that entrypoint, or even directly to the option of that entrypoint.
- To reference options that do not exist (for example, options that were removed in an earlier version), use ``O(ignore:option)`` and ``O(ignore:option=name)``. The ``ignore:`` part will not be shown to the user by documentation rendering.

> Option names can refer to suboptions by listing the path to the option separated by dots. For example, if you have an option ``foo`` with suboption ``bar``, then you must use ``O(foo.bar)`` to reference that suboption. You can add array indications like ``O(foo[].bar)`` or even ``O(foo[-1].bar)`` to indicate specific list elements. Everything between ``[`` and ``]`` pairs will be ignored to determine the real name of the option. For example, ``O(foo[foo | length - 1].bar[])`` results in the same link as ``O(foo.bar)``, but the text ``foo[foo | length - 1].bar[]`` displays instead of ``foo.bar``.

Reviewer 3: @felixfontein What's the use case for the array index support? Also, is only `foo[x].bar` supported, but not `foo.bar[x]`?

Reviewer 3: Looking at https://github.com/ansible/ansible/pull/80243/ more closely, I think I've answered the second question myself. It does appear that `foo.bar[x]` is supported.

Author: The idea is that in case of having lists or dictionaries, you can reference a specific entry, like `foo['bar']` or `foo[0]` or `foo[-1]`, while the docs generator still knows that this is about the option `foo`.

`foo.bar[x]` is also supported. Basically you can have `[]` with something between after every component.

Rules for using ``O()`` and ``RV()`` are very strict. You must follow syntax rules so that documentation renderers can create hyperlinks for the options resp. return values.

The allowed syntaxes are as follows:

> - To reference an option for the current plugin/module, or the current role's entrypoint (inside a role's entrypoint documentation), use ``O(option)`` and ``O(option=name)``.

Reviewer: I know it increases the word count but I generally discourage the possessive form because it can be confused with verb contractions and is a little anthropomorphic.

s / or the current role's entrypoint / or the entrypoint of the current role

I'd also maybe change the other instances of possessive in the following lines. 

s / a role's documentation / role documentation 
s / that entrypoint's option / an entrypoint option

Author: Thanks! I tried to improve that in 055327c5b66a586d47bcb3a6613d41fcd8d2efb0 using your suggestions, can you check the result?
